# JavaScript

# Basic Concepts

java script is a programming language of web that also support OOP  .interprated at runtime by web browser and can be used as general programming language can run in terminal as any other scripting language Nodejs

 

## variables

In JavaScript, variables are used to store data values. They are created using the **`var`**, **`let`**, or **`const`** keyword, depending on the desired scope and mutability of the variable.

Here's an explanation of each keyword and its usage:

1. **`var`**: Historically, **`var`** was the primary way to declare variables in JavaScript. However, it has some scoping quirks and is now considered less preferable compared to **`let`** and **`const`**. Variables declared with **`var`** are function-scoped or globally scoped, meaning they are 
2. **`let`**: Introduced in ECMAScript 6 (ES6), **`let`** provides block-scoping, which means the variable is limited to the block where it is defined (typically within curly braces **`{}`**). It allows reassignment of values.accessible within the function or the global scope.
3. **`const`**: Also introduced in ES6, **`const`** is used to declare variables that are block-scoped and have a constant, unchangeable value. Once assigned, a **`const`** variable cannot be reassigned or redeclared.

## Data types

**Primitive Types:**

1. **Number**: Represents numeric values. It includes integers, floating-point numbers, and special numeric values like **`Infinity`** and **`NaN`**.
2. **String**: Represents sequences of characters.
3. **Boolean**: Represents logical values, **`true`** or **`false`**.
4. **Null**: Represents the intentional absence of any object value.
5. **Undefined**: Represents an uninitialized variable or an object property that does not exist.
6. **Symbol**: Represents a unique identifier.

Primitive types are immutable, meaning their values cannot be changed once assigned. When you assign a new value to a variable holding a primitive type, it creates a new copy of the value.

**Reference Types:**

1. **Object**: Represents a collection of key-value pairs. Objects include arrays, functions, and other complex data structures.
2. **Array**: Represents an ordered collection of values.
3. **Function**: Represents a reusable block of code.
4. **Date**: Represents a specific date and time.

Reference types are mutable, meaning their values can be modified. When you assign a reference type to a variable, the variable holds a reference (memory address) to the actual value stored in memory. Multiple variables can reference the same object, and changes made through one variable will be reflected in others.

It's important to note that primitive types are stored by value, while reference types are stored by reference. Understanding this distinction is crucial when working with JavaScript data types.

## Control Structure

JavaScript provides several control structures that allow you to control the flow of execution in your code. The main control structures in JavaScript include:

1. **Conditional Statements:**
    - **if statement**: Executes a block of code if a specified condition is true.
    - **if...else statement**: Executes a block of code if a specified condition is true, otherwise executes a different block of code.
    - **else if statement**: Allows you to chain multiple conditions together in an if...else statement.
    - **switch statement**: Evaluates an expression and executes a block of code depending on matching case labels.
2. **Loops:**
    - **for loop**: Repeats a block of code for a specified number of times.
    - **while loop**: Repeats a block of code while a specified condition is true.
    - **do...while loop**: Repeats a block of code while a specified condition is true, but executes the code at least once, even if the condition is initially false.
    - **for...in loop**: Iterates over the properties of an object.
    - **for...of loop**: Iterates over iterable objects like arrays, strings, etc.
3. **Jump Statements:**
    - **break statement**: Terminates the current loop or switch statement and transfers control to the next statement.
    - **continue statement**: Skips the current iteration of a loop and continues with the next iteration.
    - **return statement**: Exits the current function and optionally returns a value.
4. **Exception Handling:**
    - **try...catch statement**: Executes a block of code and catches any exceptions that occur, allowing you to handle them gracefully.

These control structures enable you to make decisions, repeat actions, iterate over data, and handle exceptions in your JavaScript code. They give you the ability to control the execution flow and make your code more flexible and responsive

## JavaScript Functions

In JavaScript, functions are reusable blocks of code that can be called and executed at any point in your program. They allow you to encapsulate logic, organize code, and perform specific tasks. Functions in JavaScript have the following syntax:

## Types of JavaScript Functions

 

JavaScript supports different types of functions that offer flexibility and various ways to define and use functions. Here are the different types of functions in JavaScript:

1. **Named Functions:**
    
    ```
    javascriptCopy code
    function functionName(parameters) {
      // Function body
    }
    
    ```
    
    Named functions have a specific name by which they can be called and referenced in the code.
    
2. **Anonymous Functions:**
    
    ```
    javascriptCopy code
    var functionName = function(parameters) {
      // Function body
    };
    
    ```
    
    Anonymous functions do not have a specific name and are assigned to a variable. They are often used as callbacks or immediately invoked.
    
3. **Arrow Functions (ES6+):**
    
    ```
    javascriptCopy code
    const functionName = (parameters) => {
      // Function body
    };
    
    ```
    
    Arrow functions provide a concise syntax and lexical scoping of **`this`**. They are often used for inline functions or as short function expressions.
    
4. **Immediately Invoked Function Expressions (IIFE):**
    
    ```
    javascriptCopy code
    (function() {
      // Function body
    })();
    
    ```
    
    IIFEs are self-invoking functions that are immediately executed after being defined. They are used to create a private scope and prevent polluting the global scope.
    
5. **Constructor Functions:**
    
    ```
    javascriptCopy code
    function ClassName(parameters) {
      // Instance properties and methods
    }
    
    ```
    
    Constructor functions are used to create objects with their own properties and methods. They are typically used with the **`new`** keyword.
    
6. **Generator Functions:**
    
    ```
    javascriptCopy code
    function* functionName() {
      // Function body with yield statements
    }
    
    ```
    
    Generator functions are special functions that can be paused and resumed. They use the **`yield`** keyword to produce a sequence of values over time.
    
7. **Higher-Order Functions:**
Higher-order functions are functions that take one or more functions as arguments or return a function as their result. They are often used for functional programming paradigms.

These different types of functions provide flexibility in how you define and use functions in JavaScript, depending on your specific needs and coding style. Each type has its own characteristics and use cases, allowing you to write more expressive and modular code.

## JavaScript Callback functions

In JavaScript, a callback function is a function that is passed as an argument to another function and is invoked (called) at a later point in time or under certain conditions. Callbacks are commonly used in asynchronous operations to handle the completion or results of those operations.

Here's an example of a callback function:

```
javascriptCopy code
function greet(name, callback) {
  console.log("Hello, " + name + "!");
  callback();
}

function sayGoodbye() {
  console.log("Goodbye!");
}

greet("John", sayGoodbye);

```

In this example, the **`greet`** function takes two parameters: **`name`** and **`callback`**. It logs a greeting message to the console and then invokes the **`callback`** function. The **`sayGoodbye`** function is passed as the callback and logs a farewell message.

When **`greet("John", sayGoodbye)`** is called, the output will be:

```
Copy code
Hello, John!
Goodbye!

```

The **`sayGoodbye`** function serves as the callback and is executed after the greeting message is logged. Callbacks allow you to define custom behavior to be executed after a specific task is completed.

Callbacks are commonly used with asynchronous operations such as fetching data from a server or executing a time-consuming task. The callback function is invoked when the asynchronous operation completes or when a certain event occurs.

Here's an example of using a callback with an asynchronous operation:

```
javascriptCopy code
function fetchData(callback) {
  setTimeout(function() {
    const data = "Some fetched data";
    callback(data);
  }, 2000);
}

function processData(data) {
  console.log("Processed data:", data);
}

fetchData(processData);

```

In this example, the **`fetchData`** function simulates an asynchronous operation with a 2-second delay using **`setTimeout`**. Once the delay is over, it invokes the **`callback`** function with the fetched data. The **`processData`** function is passed as the callback and logs the processed data.

When **`fetchData(processData)`** is called, after a 2-second delay, the output will be:

```
kotlinCopy code
Processed data: Some fetched data

```

Callbacks allow you to handle asynchronous operations and define custom actions to be executed when those operations complete. They are a fundamental concept in JavaScript and provide a way to manage asynchronous tasks and maintain control flow in your code.

### JavaScript Object

Everything can be an object and objects do have properties and properties have values, so an object is a key value pair. The order of the key is not reserved, or there is no order. To create an object literal, we use two curly brackets.

const rectangle = {
length: 20,
width: 20
}
console.log(rectangle) // {length: 20, width: 20}

const person = {
firstName: 'Asabeneh',
lastName: 'Yetayeh',
age: 250,
country: 'Finland',
city: 'Helsinki',
skills: [
'HTML',
'CSS',
'JavaScript',
'React',
'Node',
'MongoDB',
'Python',
'D3.js'
],
isMarried: true
}
console.log(person)

### Getting values from an object

We can access values of object using two methods:

- using . followed by key name if the key-name is a one word
- using square bracket and a quote

### Creating object methods

Now, the person object has getFullName properties. The getFullName is function inside the person object and we call it an object method. The *this* key word refers to the object itself. We can use the word *this* to access the values of different properties of the object. We can not use an arrow function as object method because the word this refers to the window inside an arrow function instead of the object itself. Example of object:

const person = {
firstName: 'Asabeneh',
lastName: 'Yetayeh',
age: 250,
country: 'Finland',
city: 'Helsinki',
skills: [
'HTML',
'CSS',
'JavaScript',
'React',
'Node',
'MongoDB',
'Python',
'D3.js'
],
getFullName: function() {
return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`
}
}

console.log(person.getFullName())
// Asabeneh Yetayeh